Unit 12: Ethics and Bias, Introduction (#155)
johko/computer-vision-course: chapters/en/Unit 12 - Ethics and Biases/introduction.mdx

# Introduction

Welcome to the introduction chapter for the unit Ethics and Bias in Computer Vision. This chapter will build the foundation for many important concepts we will encounter later in this unit.
In this chapter, we will:
- Cover the popular ImageNet Roulette case study in context to ethics and bias in computer vision with examples.
- Explore what implications it can have on people and certain groups.
- Take a look into the consequences of the experiment.
- Efforts by ImageNet team to tackle and mitigate these problems.
- Conclude the chapter with some questions on the case study and lay foundation for next chapters.

So let us dive in 🤗

## ImageNet Roulette: A Case Study on Biases in Classification 

> Imagine you wake up on a Sunday morning and play around with your phone. You come across this app which tries to return sarcastic and funny labels if you upload different images or maybe take a selfie. You don't mind some fun, so you try the app out by uploading a selfie and to your shock, it returns an alarming label. It mentions you as a crime suspect (this crime can also be highly dangerous and heinous). You also see social media posts on the same app of different people with provoking labels, increasing the chances of racial and gender profiling. Some of these labels would mean: a person who is a crime offendor, a person having specific facial features that are linked with one's ethnicity, or a person's ancestory. This app returns very offensive labels oftenly and might harm self-interests and target a special group of people. A wide range of such labels which can offend people based on their religion, ethnicity, gender or age were present in the app, and you are just shocked and also kind of confused on what's going on with this? 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Imagine you wake up Sunday morning and play around with your phone. You come across this app that tries to return sarcastic and funny labels if you upload different images or maybe take a selfie. You don't mind some fun, so you try the app out by uploading a selfie, and to your shock, it returns an alarming label. It mentions you as a crime suspect (this crime can also be highly dangerous and heinous). You also see social media posts on the same app of different people with provoking labels, increasing the chances of racial and gender profiling. Some of these labels would mean a person who is a crime offender, a person with specific facial features linked with one's ethnicity, or a person's ancestry. This app returns very offensive labels often and might harm self-interests and target a special group of people. A wide range of such labels, which can offend people based on their religion, ethnicity, gender, or age, were present in the app, and you are just shocked and also kind of confused about what's going on with this. 
```

> ![ImageNet Roulette Tweet](https://huggingface.co/datasets/hf-vision/course-assets/blob/main/ethics_bias/IR Tweet.jpg)

Reviewer: Maybe we can remove the image again not to offend anyone

Author: I added some more images, shall I remove them as well? Maybe this one might be offensive, but I used blurred and censored faces and labels.

> ![ImageNet Roulette Tweet](https://huggingface.co/datasets/hf-vision/course-assets/blob/main/ethics_bias/IR Tweet.jpg)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

AI has made our lives easier and more comfortable, but many times, if AI is not kept in check, it can cause havoc in people's lives. Humans should be more inclusive and aware of others' needs and preferences. The same human values must be incorporated and reflected while developing and deploying AI models. AI models should not create negative sentiments or try to manipulate anyone against a group. 

### Introduction to ImageNet: A Large Scale Dataset for Object Recognition

> ImageNet is a large-scale dataset that was created for object recognition benchmarks at scale. The aim was to map out the entire world of objects to make machines around us smarter in scene understanding, in which humans are far better. This dataset was one of the earliest attempts of it's kind in creating a large scale dataset for object recognition. The ImageNet team started scraping image data from various sources on the internet. The original dataset consisted of around 14,197,122 images with 21,841 classes, this was referred to as Imagenet-21K reflecting around 21K classes. The annotations were crowdsourced using Amazon Mechanical Turks. A smaller subset of this dataset which was termed as ImageNet-1K contained 1,281,167 training images, 50,000 validation images and 100,000 test images with 1000 classes which was used as the foundation for the popular ImageNet Large Scale Visual Recognition Challenge (ILSVRC). The ILSVRC became the competition ground for many aspiring companies and labs working in the field of computer vision, to outperform previous approaches on labeling the objects accurately. The structure for ImageNet was based on WordNet, a database of word classifications developed at Princeton University.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
ImageNet is a large-scale dataset that was created for object recognition benchmarks at scale. The aim was to map out the entire world of objects to make machines around us smarter in scene understanding, in which humans are far better. This dataset was one of the earliest attempts of its kind to create a large-scale dataset for object recognition. The ImageNet team started scraping image data from various sources on the internet. The original dataset consisted of around 14,197,122 images with 21,841 classes; this was referred to as Imagenet-21K, reflecting around 21K classes. The annotations were crowdsourced using Amazon Mechanical Turk. A smaller subset of this dataset called ImageNet-1K contained 1,281,167 training images, 50,000 validation images, and 100,000 test images with 1000 classes which was used as the foundation for the popular ImageNet Large Scale Visual Recognition Challenge (ILSVRC). The ILSVRC became the competition ground for many aspiring companies and labs working in computer vision to outperform previous approaches on accurately labeling objects. The structure for ImageNet was based on WordNet, a database of word classifications developed at Princeton University.
```

![ImageNet General](https://huggingface.co/datasets/hf-vision/course-assets/blob/main/ethics_bias/imagenet.png)

<Tip>
💡You can read more about ImageNet here: https://www.image-net.org/. Also check out the TED Talk by Prof. Fei Fei Li on the same topic: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=40riCqvRoMs
</Tip>

### Motivation Behind ImageNet Roulette 🃏

Now, let's talk about the app we discussed earlier. This app existed on the internet a few years ago as a web application. This was an intentional experiment termed ImageNet Roulette and is still one of the most popular cases of how AI models can go wrong if the training data is not prepared carefully with guidelines. This project was developed by artist Trevor Paglen and researcher Kate Crawford. They trained their model based on the 2,833 subcategories of the Person category found in the dataset.

> The model was trained using Caffe on the images and labels in the "person" category. The app prompted the user for an image, and a face detector detects faces in the image. The detected face was then sent to the Caffe model for classification and finally the app returned an image with bounding box around the detected face and the label the Caffe model predicted. Let us see some example images from the experiment:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The model was trained using Caffe on the images and labels in the "person" category. The app prompts the user for an image, and a face detector detects faces in the image. The detected face was then sent to the Caffe model for classification. Finally, the app returned an image with a bounding box around the detected face and the label the Caffe model predicted. Let us see some example images from the experiment:
```

*Note: We have blurred faces and labels that might be offensive and triggering to readers so that the readers get an idea in a neutral manner.*

![ImageNet Roulette 1](https://huggingface.co/datasets/hf-vision/course-assets/blob/main/ethics_bias/crime offendor.jpg)
*A person being identified as a first time crime offendor, in the bottom it also shows the word connections from WordNet.*
![ImageNet Roulette 2](https://huggingface.co/datasets/hf-vision/course-assets/blob/main/ethics_bias/ethnic slur.jpg)
*A person being identified on the basis of their ancestory and ethnicity.*

The main motivation behind ImageNet Roulette was to show inherent biases in classifying people. It was trained on only the "person" category from the ImageNet dataset (as discussed earlier).

> So what went wrong? The inference on different images reflected harmful and provocative on many levels. The biggest cause for bias in this system was largely due to the already available ImageNet categories. The classes reflect how they were kind of absurd, offensive, and provocative while annotating the images. Some of the labels (after rephrasing them from their initial labels, to avoid triggering) would mean: a person who is an addict, a person with questionable character, a person who is against a specific group of people, a person who is unsuccessful and a loser, and many more. A wide range of labels that categorize people based on gender, race, profession, etc., was inherent in ImageNet. And where did it go wrong? These labels are all drawn from the structure of WordNet. This is exactly where the biases crept into this model (due to overlooking the data preparation process, irrelevant images were downloaded in bulk). We will explore the reasons mentioned by the ImageNet team `later` in the chapter.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
So what went wrong? The inference on different images reflected harmful and provocative on many levels. The biggest cause for bias in this system was largely due to the already available ImageNet categories. The classes reflect how they were kind of absurd, offensive, and provocative while annotating the images. Some of the labels (after rephrasing them from their initial labels to avoid triggering) would mean a person who is an addict, a person with questionable character, a person who is against a specific group of people, a person who is unsuccessful, and a loser, and many more. A wide range of labels that categorize people based on gender, race, profession, etc., was inherent in ImageNet. And where did it go wrong? These labels are all drawn from the structure of WordNet. This is exactly where the biases crept into this model (due to overlooking the data preparation process, irrelevant images were downloaded in bulk). We will explore the reasons mentioned by the ImageNet team `later` in the chapter.
```

> Would you like such models to be deployed without any checks? If deployed, are you fine with letting people around you refer to you as an unsuccessful person or rape suspect and make a viral post? This is what went wrong and unlooked for while preparing the dataset. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Would you like such models to be deployed without any checks? If deployed, are you fine with letting people around you refer to you as an unsuccessful person and make a viral post? This is what went wrong and unlooked for while preparing the dataset. 
```

Author: Just missed this one

### Implications of ImageNet Roulette

Let us explore the implications this experiment had:

1. It exposed deep rooted biases within the ImageNet annotations which are often offensive and stereotypical, particularly concerning race and gender.
2. The experiment also questions the integrity of datasets used to train AI models especially within the ImageNet dataset. It highlights the need for more rigorous scrutiny and ethical considerations in creating and annotating the training data.
3. The shocking results acted as a catalyst for discussions around ethical considerations in AI. It prompted a broader conversation within the AI community about the responsibility to ensure fair and unbiased training data, emphasizing the need for ethical data practices.
In general, if models like this are deployed in real life applications, it can have alarming effects on different people and target groups.

> ### Consequences of ImageNet Roulette[[later]]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Consequences of ImageNet Roulette
```

**Problem 1: Offensive Synonym Sets in WordNet** WordNet contains many offensive synsets that are inappropriate as image labels. Somehow, a lot of these labels creeped into ImageNet and were included. 
**Solutions:** 
a. ImageNet appointed a group of in-house manual annotators to classify synsets in three categories: *offensive*, *sensitive* and *safe*. Offensive labels are racial or gender slurs, sensitive labels are not offensive but might cause offense according to the context, and safe labels are not offensive.
b. Out of the 2,832 synsets within the person category, 1,593 unsafe synsets (offensive and sensitive) were identified and the remaining 1,239 synsets were temporarily deemed safe. 
c. A new version of ImageNet was prepared by removing unsafe synsets resulting in removal of around 600,000 images in total.

![Good person IR](https://huggingface.co/datasets/hf-vision/course-assets/blob/main/ethics_bias/goodperson.jpg)
*This is an example of non-imageable concept. Logically, a person cannot be identified as good depending just on visual appearance.*

> **Problem 2: Non-imageable concepts** Some synsets might not be offensive but including them in the overall dataset is also not logical. For example: we cannot classify a person in the image as a philanthropist. Similarly, there might be many synsets that cannot be captured visually using images. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Problem 2: Non-imageable concepts** Some synsets might not be offensive, but including them in the overall dataset is also not logical. For example, we cannot classify a person in the image as a philanthropist. Similarly, there might be many synsets that cannot be captured visually using images. 
```

# Introduction

> Welcome to the Introductory chapter for the unit Ethics and Bias in Computer Vision. This chapter will build the foundation for many important concepts we will encounter later in this unit. In this chapter, we will:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Welcome to the introduction chapter for the unit Ethics and Bias in Computer Vision. This chapter will build the foundation for many important concepts we will encounter later in this unit.
In this chapter, we will:
```

- Cover the popular ImageNet Roulette case study in context to ethics and bias in computer vision with examples.
- Explore what implications it can have on people and certain groups.
- Take a look into the consequences of the experiment.
- Efforts of ImageNet to tackle and mitigate these problems.
- Conclude the chapter with some questions on the case study and lay foundation for next chapters.

So let us dive in 🤗

> ## ImageNet Roulette: A case study on biases in classification 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## ImageNet Roulette: A Case Study on Biases in Classification 
```

Author: Initially, I kept it this way but removed 😓

> Imagine you wake up on a Sunday morning and play around with your phone. You come across this app which tries to return sarcastic and funny labels if you upload different images or maybe take a selfie. You don't mind some fun, so you try the app out by uploading a selfie and to your shock, it returns the label 'rape suspect'. You also see social media posts on the same app of different people with provoking labels, increasing the chances of racial profiling like first-offendor, gook, negroid, slant-eye, mulatto etc. This app returns very offensive labels oftenly and might harm self-interests and target a special group of people. A wide range of such labels which can offend people based on their religion, ethnicity, gender or age were present in the app, and you are just shocked and also kind of confused on what's going on with this? 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Imagine you wake up on a Sunday morning and play around with your phone. You come across this app that tries to return sarcastic and funny labels if you upload different images or maybe take a selfie. You don't mind some fun, so you try the app out by uploading a selfie, and to your shock, it returns the label 'rape suspect'. You also see social media posts on the same app of different people with provoking tags, increasing the chances of racial profiling like first-offender, gook, negroid, slant-eye, mulatto, etc. This app often returns very offensive labels that might harm self-interests and target a particular group. A wide range of such titles, which can offend people based on their religion, ethnicity, gender, or age, were present in the app, and you are just shocked and confused about what's going on with this. 
```
I have given formatting suggestions but I'd love it if @giadilli could look at whether we can really have this kind of wording in our chapters, it's triggering

Author: Thank you @merveenoyan I would like to make it less serious and triggering for readers, somehow delivering the case study without being too heavy. I was also thinking of removing some labels in the content, but just to make a point of where models could go wrong, I included it.

Reviewer 2: Hello. I don't have much context here, but I would suggest a few things to help address Merve's concerns. First and most importantly, I would avoid the explicit terms but rather use censored terms, synonyms to understand the case study, or something like "the app's response is unexpectedly alarming: it tags your image with an inappropriate and offensive label". Secondly, I would maybe conclude by saying that this story triggers an intuition of ethical challenges, so maybe show it explicitly to the reader, in a couple of words/sentences (something like "This discovery leaves you in shock and raises serious questions about the ethical implications of such technology"). I hope this helps.

Author: Thank you @giadilli for your suggestions. I will make appropriate changes in the language and style and will replace explicit labels.

Author: I removed the labels and mentioned it differently. For example: "a person who is suspected of a heinous and dangerous crime", followed this in the whole content now. 
I might as well add the images now with the corrected labels, and maybe add a disclaimer or a short note like: "We changed the image labels to deliver the content in a safe and neutral manner" or something like that.

Some examples:

![ImageNet Roulette Tweet]()

> AI has made our life easier and comfortable, but many times if AI is not kept on check, it can cause havoc in people's lives. As humans, we should be more inclusive and aware of others' needs and preferences. The same human values must be incorporated and reflected while developing and deploying AI models. AI models should not create negative sentiments or try to manipulate anyone against a group. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
AI has made our lives easier and more comfortable, but many times, if AI is not kept in check, it can cause havoc in people's lives. Humans should be more inclusive and aware of others' needs and preferences. The same human values must be incorporated and reflected while developing and deploying AI models. AI models should not create negative sentiments or try to manipulate anyone against a group. 
```

> ### Introduction to ImageNet: A large scale dataset for object detection

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Introduction to ImageNet: A Large Scale Dataset for Object Detection
```

> ImageNet is a large scale dataset which was created for object recognition benchmarks at scale. The aim was to map out the entire world of objects for making machines around us smarter in the task of scene understanding, in which humans are far better. This dataset was one of the earliest attempts of it's kind in creating a large scale dataset for object detection and localization. The ImageNet team started scraping image data from various sources on the internet. The original dataset consisted of around 14,197,122 images with 21,841 classes, this was referred to as Imagenet-21K reflecting around 21K classes. The annotations were crowdsourced using Amazon Mechanical Turks. A smaller subset of this dataset which was termed as ImageNet-1K contained 1,281,167 training images, 50,000 validation images and 100,000 test images with 1000 classes which was used as the foundation for the popular ImageNet Large Scale Visual Recognition Challenge (ILSVRC). The ILSVRC became the competition ground for many aspiring companies and labs working in the field of computer vision, to outperform previous approaches on labelling the objects accurately. The structure for ImageNet was based on WordNet which is a database of word classifications developed at Princeton Univeristy.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
ImageNet is a large-scale dataset that was created for object recognition benchmarks at scale. The aim was to map out the entire world of objects to make machines around us smarter in scene understanding, in which humans are far better. This dataset was one of the earliest attempts of it's kind in creating a large scale dataset for object detection and localization. The ImageNet team started scraping image data from various sources on the internet. The original dataset consisted of around 14,197,122 images with 21,841 classes, this was referred to as Imagenet-21K reflecting around 21K classes. The annotations were crowdsourced using Amazon Mechanical Turks. A smaller subset of this dataset which was termed as ImageNet-1K contained 1,281,167 training images, 50,000 validation images and 100,000 test images with 1000 classes which was used as the foundation for the popular ImageNet Large Scale Visual Recognition Challenge (ILSVRC). The ILSVRC became the competition ground for many aspiring companies and labs working in the field of computer vision, to outperform previous approaches on labeling the objects accurately. The structure for ImageNet was based on WordNet, a database of word classifications developed at Princeton University.
```

![ImageNet General]()

<Tip>
💡You can read more about ImageNet here: https://www.image-net.org/. Also check out the TED Talk by Prof. Fei Fei Li on the same topic: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=40riCqvRoMs
</Tip>

> ### Motivation behind ImageNet Roulette 🃏

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Motivation Behind ImageNet Roulette 🃏
```

> Now let's talk about the app we discussed earlier. This app existed a few years back on internet as a web application. This was an intentional experiment termed as ImageNet Roulette, and is still one of the most popular cases of how AI models can go wrong if the training data is not prepared carefully with guidelines. This project was developed by artist Trevor Paglen and researcher Kate Crawford. They trained their model based on the 2,833 subcategories of the Person category found in the dataset.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now, let's talk about the app we discussed earlier. This app existed on the internet a few years ago as a web application. This was an intentional experiment termed ImageNet Roulette and is still one of the most popular cases of how AI models can go wrong if the training data is not prepared carefully with guidelines. This project was developed by artist Trevor Paglen and researcher Kate Crawford. They trained their model based on the 2,833 subcategories of the Person category found in the dataset.
```

> The model was trained using Caffe on the images and labels in the "person" category. The app prompted the user for an image, and a face detector detects faces in the image. The detected face was then sent to the Caffe model for classification and finally the app returned an image with bounding box around the detected face and the label the Caffe model predicted.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The model was trained using Caffe on the images and labels in the "person" category. The app prompts the user for an idea, and a face detector detects faces in the picture. The detected face was then sent to the Caffe model for classification. Finally, the app returned an image with a bounding box around the detected face and the label the Caffe model predicted.
```

Author: Hey @merveenoyan in this statement: "The app prompts the user for an `idea`" I feel the word should be `image` instead of `idea`? Just wanted to cross check.

![ImageNet Roulette]()

The main motivation behind ImageNet Roulette was to show inherent biases in classifying people. It was trained on only the "person" category from the ImageNet dataset (as discussed earlier).

> So what went wrong? The inference on different images reflected harmful and provocative on many levels. The biggest cause for bias in this system was largely due to the already available ImageNet categories. The classes reflect how they were kind of absurd, offensive and provocative while annotating the images, some examples being: pill pusher, ball buster, snob, slut, anti-semite, hermaphrodite, loser and many more. A wide range of labels which categorize people based on gender, race, profession etc. was inherent in ImageNet. And where did it go wrong? These labels are all drawn from the structure of WordNet. This is exactly where the biases creeped in this model (due to overlooking the data preparation process, irrelevant images were downloaded at bulk). We will explore the reasons mentioned by the ImageNet team `later` in the chapter.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
So what went wrong? The inference on different images reflected harmful and provocative on many levels. The biggest cause for bias in this system was largely due to the already available ImageNet categories. The classes reflect how they were kind of absurd, offensive, and provocative while annotating the images, some examples being: pill pusher, ball buster, snob, slut, anti-semite, hermaphrodite, loser, and many more. A wide range of labels that categorize people based on gender, race, profession, etc., was inherent in ImageNet. And where did it go wrong? These labels are all drawn from the structure of WordNet. This is exactly where the biases crept into this model (due to overlooking the data preparation process, irrelevant images were downloaded in bulk). We will explore the reasons mentioned by the ImageNet team `later` in the chapter.
```

> Would you like such models to be deployed without any checks? If deployed, are you fine with letting people around you refer as a unsuccessful person or rape suspect and make a viral post? This is what went wrong and unlooked for during preparing the dataset. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Would you like such models to be deployed without any checks? If deployed, are you fine with letting people around you refer to you as an unsuccessful person or rape suspect and make a viral post? This is what went wrong and unlooked for while preparing the dataset. 
```

### Implications of ImageNet Roulette

Let us explore the implications this experiment had:

1. It exposed deep rooted biases within the ImageNet annotations which are often offensive and stereotypical, particularly concerning race and gender.
2. The experiment also questions the integrity of datasets used to train AI models especially within the ImageNet dataset. It highlights the need for more rigorous scrutiny and ethical considerations in creating and annotating the training data.
3. The shocking results acted as a catalyst for discussions around ethical considerations in AI. It prompted a broader conversation within the AI community about the responsibility to ensure fair and unbiased training data, emphasizing the need for ethical data practices.
In general, if models like this are deployed in real life applications, it can have alarming effects on different people and target groups.

### Consequences of ImageNet Roulette[[later]]

> Initially, the "person" category was not noticed as ImageNet was an object detection benchmark. But after this experiment, some crucial changes happened in the community. In this case study, the creators were able to show the problems with the inherent biases in ImageNet (which was in shadow till around 2018, when some research started showing up). After a few days, ImageNet released a research paper summarizing their one year long project funded by NSF. The full ImageNet dataset was disabled for download since January 2019, whereas the 1000 category dataset ImageNet-1K was not affected. The ImageNet team provided some underlying issues and some ways to deal with them (surprisingly the ImageNet Roulette was not mentioned in their report).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Initially, the "person" category was not noticed as ImageNet was an object detection benchmark. But after this experiment, some crucial changes happened in the community. In this case study, the creators were able to show the problems with the inherent biases in ImageNet (which was in shadow till around 2018, when some research started showing up). After a few days, ImageNet released a research paper summarizing their one-year-long project funded by NSF. The full ImageNet dataset was disabled for download since January 2019, whereas the 1000-category dataset ImageNet-1K was not affected. The ImageNet team provided some underlying issues and ways to deal with them (surprisingly, the ImageNet Roulette was not mentioned in their report).
```

b. Out of the 2,832 synsets within the person category, 1,593 unsafe synsets (offensive and sensitive) were identified and the remaining 1,239 synsets were temporarily deemed safe. 
c. A new version of ImageNet was prepared by removing unsafe synsets resulting in removal of around 600,000 images in total.

**Problem 2: Non-imageable concepts** Some synsets might not be offensive but including them in the overall dataset is also not logical. For example: we cannot classify a person in the image as a philanthropist. Similarly, there might be many synsets that cannot be captured visually using images. 
**Solutions:**
a. For such concepts, multiple workers were asked to rate each of the 2,394 people synsets (safe + sensitive).
b. The rating was done based on the ease with which the synset arouses mental imagery in a scale of 1-5, 1 being very hard and 5 begin very easy.
c. The median rating was 2.36 and around 219 synsets had a rating more than 4, images with very low imageability were removed.

![Programmer ImageNet]()

> **Problem 3: Diversity of images** Many images in ImageNet might have lesser representation, for example: image search of a particular profession can end up returning different gender ratios as that existing in the real world. Images of construction worker or a gangster might be more inclined toward a particular gender or a race.  Not only during search, but also during annotations and cleaning of data, annotators might be inclined to give responses for particular categories in an already socially stereotypical manner. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Problem 3: Diversity of images** Many images in ImageNet might have lesser representation. For example, an image search of a particular profession can end up returning different gender ratios as in the real world. Images of construction workers or gangsters might be more inclined toward a particular gender or race.  Not only during search but also during annotations and data cleaning, annotators might be inclined to respond to particular categories in an already socially stereotypical manner. 
```

**Solutions:**
a. To mitigate such stereotypes in search and annotations, images should have higher visual arousal (visually more strong).
b. ImageNet team did a demographic analysis on most imageable attributes like gender, color and age.
c. After this analysis, the dataset was balanced by removing overrepresented attributes in a synset leading to a more uniform gender, color and age balance. 

![Face Obfuscation ImageNet]()

> **Problem 4: Privacy Concerns** While classification was subject to some inherent biases, to protect the identity of an individual, privacy is also an equally important factor. If these classifications from the experiment were viral, it would have a huge impact on people's life and overall wellbeing. To ensure this, AI models should not only be fair but should also preserve privacy of subjects.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Problem 4: Privacy Concerns** While classification was subject to some inherent biases, to protect an individual's identity, privacy is also an equally important factor. If these classifications from the experiment were viral, it would have a huge impact on people's lives and overall well-being. To ensure this, AI models should not only be fair but also preserve subjects' privacy.
```

**Solutions:**
a. Imagenet-1K dataset had 3 people categories. Separate face annotations were carried out and a face-blurred version of the dataset was created.
b. Image obfuscation techniques like blurring and mosaicing were applied to these images.
c. It was shown that these images lead to a very minimal drop of accuracy while benchmarking on object recognition tasks and are suitable for training privacy-aware visual classifiers.

<Tip>
💡For more details on the ImageNet Roulette experiment, you can follow the article on ImageNet Roulette. The experiment is posted on Excavating AI: https://excavating.ai/ which discusses this in detail. To know more about ImageNet's stance and research on mitigating these issues, you can take a look into the full technical report submitted by them here: https://www.image-net.org/filtering-and-balancing/ 
</Tip>

## Conclusion 

> In the later chapters as well we will follow the same flow for case studies, and try to answer some basic questions. Although we will discuss AI models in general, but our focus will be mainly on CV models and ethical concerns revolving them.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the later chapters, we will also follow the same flow for case studies and try to answer some basic questions. Although we will discuss AI models in general, our focus will be mainly on CV models and the ethical concerns revolving around them.
```

Some examples:

![ImageNet Roulette Tweet]()

AI has made our lives easier and more comfortable, but many times, if AI is not kept in check, it can cause havoc in people's lives. Humans should be more inclusive and aware of others' needs and preferences. The same human values must be incorporated and reflected while developing and deploying AI models. AI models should not create negative sentiments or try to manipulate anyone against a group. 

> ### Introduction to ImageNet: A Large Scale Dataset for Object Detection

Reviewer 3: `Object Recognition` might be better word because ImageNet is primarly released as Image Classification Dataset and later it was also being used for Object Dectection and Localization.

Author: Yes you are correct, thanks @SuryaKrishna02 
Will make the changes now 😄

> ImageNet is a large-scale dataset that was created for object recognition benchmarks at scale. The aim was to map out the entire world of objects to make machines around us smarter in scene understanding, in which humans are far better. This dataset was one of the earliest attempts of it's kind in creating a large scale dataset for object detection and localization. The ImageNet team started scraping image data from various sources on the internet. The original dataset consisted of around 14,197,122 images with 21,841 classes, this was referred to as Imagenet-21K reflecting around 21K classes. The annotations were crowdsourced using Amazon Mechanical Turks. A smaller subset of this dataset which was termed as ImageNet-1K contained 1,281,167 training images, 50,000 validation images and 100,000 test images with 1000 classes which was used as the foundation for the popular ImageNet Large Scale Visual Recognition Challenge (ILSVRC). The ILSVRC became the competition ground for many aspiring companies and labs working in the field of computer vision, to outperform previous approaches on labeling the objects accurately. The structure for ImageNet was based on WordNet, a database of word classifications developed at Princeton University.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
ImageNet is a large-scale dataset that was created for object recognition benchmarks at scale. The aim was to map out the entire world of objects to make machines around us smarter in scene understanding, in which humans are far better. This dataset was one of the earliest attempts of it's kind in creating a large scale dataset for image classification. The ImageNet team started scraping image data from various sources on the internet. The original dataset consisted of around 14,197,122 images with 21,841 classes, this was referred to as Imagenet-21K reflecting around 21K classes. The annotations were crowdsourced using Amazon Mechanical Turks. A smaller subset of this dataset which was termed as ImageNet-1K contained 1,281,167 training images, 50,000 validation images and 100,000 test images with 1000 classes which was used as the foundation for the popular ImageNet Large Scale Visual Recognition Challenge (ILSVRC). The ILSVRC became the competition ground for many aspiring companies and labs working in the field of computer vision, to outperform previous approaches on labeling the objects accurately. The structure for ImageNet was based on WordNet, a database of word classifications developed at Princeton University.
```

### Implications of ImageNet Roulette

Let us explore the implications this experiment had:

1. It exposed deep rooted biases within the ImageNet annotations which are often offensive and stereotypical, particularly concerning race and gender.
2. The experiment also questions the integrity of datasets used to train AI models especially within the ImageNet dataset. It highlights the need for more rigorous scrutiny and ethical considerations in creating and annotating the training data.
3. The shocking results acted as a catalyst for discussions around ethical considerations in AI. It prompted a broader conversation within the AI community about the responsibility to ensure fair and unbiased training data, emphasizing the need for ethical data practices.
In general, if models like this are deployed in real life applications, it can have alarming effects on different people and target groups.

### Consequences of ImageNet Roulette[[later]]

> Initially, the "person" category was not noticed as ImageNet was an object detection benchmark. But after this experiment, some crucial changes happened in the community. In this case study, the creators were able to show the problems with the inherent biases in ImageNet (which was in shadow till around 2018, when some research started showing up). After a few days, ImageNet released a research paper summarizing their one-year-long project funded by NSF. The full ImageNet dataset was disabled for download since January 2019, whereas the 1000-category dataset ImageNet-1K was not affected. The ImageNet team provided some underlying issues and ways to deal with them (surprisingly, the ImageNet Roulette was not mentioned in their report).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Initially, the "person" category was not noticed as ImageNet was an image classification benchmark. But after this experiment, some crucial changes happened in the community. In this case study, the creators were able to show the problems with the inherent biases in ImageNet (which was in shadow till around 2018, when some research started showing up). After a few days, ImageNet released a research paper summarizing their one-year-long project funded by NSF. The full ImageNet dataset was disabled for download since January 2019, whereas the 1000-category dataset ImageNet-1K was not affected. The ImageNet team provided some underlying issues and ways to deal with them (surprisingly, the ImageNet Roulette was not mentioned in their report).
```

Author: I think here I would like to stay on "object detection" because this is the large scale visual recognition challenge we are talking about. The object detection gives an idea that it was being used for non living objects and person is not in this. Still let me know what you think on this.

Reviewer 3: Makes sense.
